
Page 1:
UNITED NATIONS @) NATIONS UNIES
axa?
Sr

United Nations Interim \ yy Mission d’Administration Intérimaire
Administration Mission in Kosovo Xs HA des Nations Unies au Kosovo
UNMIK

Investigation Task Force

Allegations of theft and corruption arising out of the collection of handling and
landing fees and de-icing costs for passenger aircraft using Pristina Airport.
(Case 0283/04)

|. INTRODUCTION

1. This case arises out of an audit report dated 28 February 2003 into the financial
statements of Pristina International Airport conducted by the Chartered
Accountants which led to an investigation concerning alleged corruption and
irregularities arising in the course of procurements and contracts at Pristina
International Airport.

2. There are three specific allegations in this report of investigation:

e Employees overcharged commercial flights using Pristina Airport for handling and
landing fees and other services.

e Employees failed to account for the money paid to them in handling and landing
fees and other services.

e Employees requested and /or received corrupt payments in return for allocating
landing slots to airlines at the most convenient times.

Il APPLICABLE TERRITORIAL LAWS AND UNITED NATIONS
PROCEDURAL RULES

Section 1 of UNMIK Regulation 1999/24 dated 12 December 1999 as amended,
states that the law applicable in Kosovo shall be:

a) “The regulations promulgated by the Special Representative of the
Secretary General (SRSG) and subsidiary instruments issued pursuant to
those regulations; and

b) The Law in force in Kosovo on 22 March 1989.”

UN Staff Regulations 1.2 (b) stipulates “Staff members shall uphold the highest
standards of efficiency, competence and integrity”

Staff Rule 110.1: Misconduct. “Failure by a staff member to comply with his or her
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations, the Staff Regulations and the
Staff Rules or other relevant administrative issuances, or to observe the standards of
conduct expected of an international civil servant, may amount to unsatisfactory
conduct within the meaning of staff regulation 10.2, leading to the institution of
disciplinary measures for misconduct.”

Page 2:
lll. METHODOLOGY

. This investigation was conducted pursuant to Executive Decision No 2003/16 on
the establishment of the Investigation Task Force. The ITF investigators
conducted an enquiry into the allegations raised by interviews with persons
indicated to be witnesses and persons potentially implicated in the allegations; by
obtaining documents from the Pristina Airport administration and from Pillar IV,
which were then analysed for relevance to the inquiry at hand.

. This report details the findings resulting from these enquiries.

IV. BACKGROUND INFORMATION

. Pristina International Airport constitutes a state owned enterprise under
Yugoslavian law. The assets of the airport include the runways, terminal
buildings, hanger, fuel storage facilities and equipment. During the period
covered by this investigation, from 2001 until 2003, they were maintained by the
Public Enterprise Airport Pristina, (PEAP) in cooperation with Military Units of the
Kosovo Force (KFOR). Pursuant to United Nations Security Council Resolution
1244 dated 10 June 1999, and UNMIK Regulation No 1/1999 dated 25 July 1999,
UNMIK is mandated to administer the territory of Kosovo, including state owned
and publicly owned assets. This includes Pristina International Airport.

. Until the end of June 2002, responsibility for the administration of the Pristina
Airport was entrusted to the Civil Administration Pillar (Pillar Il) of UNMIK,
including Official 1 and Official 2. Pillar Il supervised the Department of Transport
and Infrastructure (DOTI) Official 1. The DOTI was later known as the Transport
Sector of the UNMIK Directorate of Infrastructure Affairs. DOTI Official 1 left
UNMIK at the end of June 2002. DOTI Official 2 was recruited by the DOTI as an
international staff member on 31 July 2000 in charge of airport operations,
reporting to DOT! Official 1, and continued in this role until 30 September 2001.
Engineering expertise was provided by a series of engineers seconded from the
armed forces of a United Nations member state, specifically Airport Engineer |,
Airport Engineer 2 and Airport Engineer 3, and later by the Consultant from the
Consulting Firm.

. On 1 July 2002, the responsibility for the administration of the Airport passed
from Pillar Il to the Kosovo Trust Agency (KTA) and Pillar IV. The Divisional
Manager was appointed at the Airport Sector, KTA at the same time. Under him
were the PEAP Official and the Air Traffic Control Services (ATCS) Official.

. On 1 April 2004 Pristina International Airport, which had until that time been
under the jurisdiction of KFOR was handed over to civilian jurisdiction, under
ICAO regulations.

. Itis against this background of change that procurement procedures relating to
the following contract have been examined.

Page 3:
3
V. INVESTIGATION DETAILS

10. This case concerns allegations of corruption by staff at Pristina Airport arising
from handling and landing fees levied on passenger aircraft using the Airport in
the period January - December 2001. The case also deals with allegations of
corruption arising from de-icing costs levied on passenger aircraft using the
Airport during the same period and alleged requests for corrupt payments for the
allocation of landing slots to airlines at the most convenient times.

11.Samples were taken from a total of 21 airlines using the airport at Pristina in
2001. The year 2001 was selected due to the fact that fees appear to have been
collected and receipts issued manually. Therefore, it was assessed that a greater
risk of fraudulent activity existed.

12.Where possible, similar dates and the type of aircraft were selected to allow for a
comparative analysis of landing charges and passenger charges.

13.An average price was then calculated for each type of aircraft by selecting a
sample of landings for each airline and multiplied by the number of flights to give
an estimate of the total income from landing fees.

14. The ITF obtained a price list, dated 1 January 2002, which provides an indication
as to the respective costs for basic airport services, based on the weight of the
aircraft.

Handling Fees and De-icing costs

15. The total income from landing fees in 2001 was estimated at DM 14,357,949
(equivalent to €7,341,163. This compares with a figure of €7,376,182 in the profit
and loss accounts produced by the Chartered Accountants.

16. This result suggests that in the absence of further information, the aircraft
charges agreed with the figures produced in the official accounts of the Airport.
However, the integrity of the information on which the accounts are based cannot
be verified. The possibility therefore remains that airlines were routinely
overcharged.

17. It was noted that there are small variations in the prices charged to different
airlines for the same type of aircraft. However, certain airlines appeared to have
measurably lower costs. These were:

e Airline 1 — Average DM 2190
e Airline 2 — Average DM 2888.

18. The receipts books do not indicate whether Airline 1 carried passengers and if so,
how many.

19. It was notable that where aircraft requested de-icing facilities, this appears to
have added considerably to the landing fees costs.

20.A schedule was created detailing costs associated with de-icing. With the
possible exception of one Airline 3 flight, this does not appear to indicate any

Page 4:
obvious anomalies, although it again did not take into account the possibility that
airlines were uniformly being overcharged for de-icing.

Landing Fees

21.Passenger taxes appear to be charged at 25 DM per passenger. A spreadsheet
was created detailing the total number of persons travelling in the period 1
February 2001 until 31 December 2001 together with the number of persons not
paying passenger tax. The file did not contain any data for the month of January
2001.

22. The spreadsheet produced by the ITF indicated a total of 375,472 passengers
during the relevant period, of whom, 18,996 did not pay the required passenger
tax. If this number is multiplied by 25 DM and converted to Euro per paying
passenger, this gives a total of €4,799,395 as against a stated income figure in
the accounts of €4,919,190 for the whole year. This gap is diminished if a number
of passengers were to be added for the month of January 2001.

2

wo

. However, there remains a possibility that the passengers were not being charged
airport tax when they should have been, or that the sums detailed in the accounts
do not equate with sums actually paid.

24.In an effort to verify whether or not airlines were being routinely overcharged for
handling and landing fees or de-icing costs, the ITF sent a request to IATA to
provide information from Airline 3, Airline 4, Airline 5 and Airline 6 concerning any
instances of overcharging or extortion of money by staff at Pristina Airport. The
request also sought information concerning any instances of corruption arising
from the allocation of landing slots at Pristina Airport.

2

oO

.Regrettably, to date, no substantive response has been received from the airlines
or IATA.

Vi. CONCLUSIONS

26.Whilst the figures for handling and landing fees broadly agree with the figures
produced in the accounts of the Airport, it is not possible to ascertain whether the
source of information forming the basis of the accounts is reliable.

27.\In the absence of cooperation from the Airlines and IATA, despite repeated
requests by the ITF, it is not possible to progress the case further.

Vil. RECOMMENDATIONS

28. It is therefore recommended that based on the results of this investigation,
UNMIK should prepare an official request to the above-mentioned airlines in an
effort to obtain their support and any information relevant to this matter.
(IV04/283/01)
