
Page 1:
3.

4.

UNITED (S\ NATIONS UNIES
NATIONS Way) Mission d’Administration
Se Intérimaire des Nations

United Nations Interim
UNMIK Unies au Kosovo

Administration Mission
in Kosovo

INVESTIGATION TASK FORCE

Allegations of Bribes/Kickbacks for Employment
at Pristina Airport (Case No. 377/04)

I - Allegations

. This report summarizes the investigation into a report supplied to the Investigation Task

Force (ITF) alleging that “kickbacks” had been paid to an airport official in order to obtain
employment at Pristina Airport. The allegations were contained in a confidential police
report written by Kosovo Police Service Officer 1 (KPS) serving in the Pristina Airport
Border Police, but originated from Non Staff member |. The allegations specifically stated
that Non Staff member 1, and others, paid kickbacks to certain high-ranking Pristina Airport
employees in the hope of receiving employment.

Il - Background

2. As this case was referred to the Department of Justice on 24 September 2004 and is
currently under two separate judicial investigations, the ITF did not continue with its
administrative investigations. This report summarizes the activities of the ITF. It should
also be noted that dissemination of this report should be severely restricted given the
ongoing criminal inquiries.

III - Investigative Details

A separate case - ITF Case No. 215/04 - relating to requests for sexual favours in return for
employment had already been under investigation when this report was received. Case No.
215-04 was subsequently closed due to the problem that none of the “victims" were willing
to come forward and file an official statement on the matter. The reasons given to the ITF for
this fear of making a report was related to the threat of losing already obtained employment
at the airport, or to jeopardize marriages and reputations.

Non Staff member 1’s statements provided to the ITF Investigators, disclosed the following
two distinct cases:

Case A

. On 25-26 July 2004, Non Staff member | alleges to have visited Official 1 (Pristina Airport)

asking how he/she could obtain employment at Pristina Airport. He/she stated that Official 1

Page 2:
had replied that this was possible, but only via the payment of a considerable amount of
money.

Non Staff member | was aware that two other persons, Non Staff member 2 and Non Staff
member 3 had already paid €7,000.00 each, to Official 1 through the same procedure, in the
hope of receiving employment at Pristina Airport.

On either 30 or 31 July 2004, Non Staff member | said he/she was contacted by Official 1’s
daughter, Official 2’s Secretary, requesting him/her to come to Restaurant | located in
Hajvali.

Non Staff member | stated that he/she was personally greeted upon his arrival by Security
Official, Official 2’s Secretary and Official 1 and another person, male, but name unknown,
who was there seeking a similar employment route.

According to Non Staff member 1, the other person paid, in his presence, the sum of
€10.000,00 to Official 2’s Secretary, just before Non Staff member | himself/herself handed
€5.000,00 to the same person.

. After both persons had paid the agreed upon cash amounts, they were both requested to sign

three different coloured books entitled “Airport Staff’, and then asked to leave because they
would be contacted by telephone as to the details of their future employment at Pristina
Airport.

. Non Staff member | told the ITF that he/she was called again, two days later, in order to pay

an additional € 1.000,00, which he/she had then given to Official 2’s Secretary, in the
presence of his/her father, Official 1, during a dinner that Official 1 and his daughter were
having at the same mentioned restaurant. Non Staff member | also said that he/she paid
approximately € 180 for that night’s dinner and that he/she was called, always by Official 2’s
Secretary, to two further dinners at Restaurant 2 and at Restaurant 1. Non-Staff member 1
was requested to pay, amounts of € 225 and € 190 for the dinners. Non Staff member | stated
that during the dinner, the following Pristina Airport staff were present: Security Official, a
Secretary, Official 2, X-Ray Official, Official 1, Official 2’s Secretary, Official 3, Official 4
and one person who only spoke English (name unknown). This person may have been
Official 5, because Non Staff member | stated that this person was not a Kosovar, but an
International and furthermore, at a certain point when this person was not present, all the
others congratulated Non Staff member | for his new job. The Investigators believe that the
above-mentioned Airport staff were attempting to demonstrate to Non Staff member | that
they were in contact with the competent person who could authorize his employment.

Case-B

. Non Staff member 1 stated that he/she was aware of another case of kickbacks for Pristina

Airport employment, which occurred circa 6 September 2004. Non Staff member 1, in his
role as the owner of a hamburger/sandwich stand/restaurant - well-frequented by airport
employees — said he/she was contacted by KPS officer 2 who requested information in
relation to what business connections Non Staff member 4 had within Pristina Airport.

Page 3:
13. Non Staff member 1 stated that Non Staff member 5, the wife of KPS Officer 2 met Non
Staff member 4 in the clothing boutique where he/she worked, while he/she was
purchasing airport uniforms. At that time, he/she had asked him/her how to obtain a job
at the airport. He/she allegedly replied he/she had no problems in getting him/her a job at
Pristina Airport due to his/her important airport contacts, but it would cost him/her €
3.000,00.

V — Conclusion

14. As ITF referred this case to the Department of Justice on 24 September 2004, no further
action was taken by ITF. Therefore, no conclusions can be drawn at this stage on the basis of
ITF Investigations.

V - Recommendations
15. The ITF offers the following recommendations:

Recommendation No. 1: Due to the fact that this case has already been referred to the
International Prosecutor and is currently being investigated by the
Financial Investigation Unit, the ITF recommends that UNMIK
Pillar IV take no administrative action against Airport staff until
the/ judicial process is finalized (1V04/377/01);

Recommendation No. 2: Should the Airport staff not be criminally charged by the
Department of Justice, ITF recommends that UNMIK Pillar IV
should consider appropriate administrative action against
implicated Pristina Airport staff in the light of the Department of
Justice’s findings ([V04/377/02).
