
Page 1:
UNITED NATIONS ¢. \) NATIONS UNIES
United Nations Interim N iy Mission d’ Administration

Administration Mission L4 Intérimaire des Nations Unies
aa

in Kosovo UNMIK au Kosovo
INVESTIGATION TASK FORCE

Investigation into Allegations of Bribery and Favouritism in Procurement of Uniforms
by Pristina Airport
(ITF Case No. 0462/04)

|. Background and Allegations

1. A Kosovo Trust Agency (KTA) Internal Audit Unit (IAU) Internal Memorandum dated 4
October 2004, which described the audit of the procurement of staff uniforms by Pristina
Airport, raised concerns as to the reasoning for the cancellation of a competitive tender
for summer and winter uniforms (Pristina Airport Reference No. PEAP/CG/UAS/19/05/04)
and the subsequent issue of a single source contract for summer uniforms for new staff
(Pristina Airport Reference No. SHKTA/CG/16-04).

2. Inthe IAU memo, reference is made to a letter of complaint dated 28-06-04 from Vendor
1, a company that competed for the tender and that was subsequently awarded the single
source contract to supply summer uniforms. The author of the letter, Vendor 1 Manager,
alleged the existence of rumours and witnesses in the matter of the bribery of
Procurement Officer 1, Pristina Airport, and the Finance Officer, Pristina Airport, by one of
Vendor 1 Manager’s competitors in the tender process, Vendor 2. Vendor 1 Manager’s
letter also identified his intention to seek legal action against Procurement Officer 1 for
allegedly violating “the procurement rules” by: replacing a member of the Bid Evaluation
Committee in the competitive tender; allowing a member of the Finance Department, the
Finance Officer, to sit on the committee; and favouring Vendor 2 in the tender process.

3. During the course of the investigation, Procurement Officer 1 told the ITF that, following
the cancellation of the competitive tender, Vendor 1 Manager had made utterances to
him/her that Procurement Officer 1 had interpreted as a threat.

4. The ITF commenced an inquiry into the allegations regarding the procurement process
and now provides a summary of the case and its findings and recommendations.

Il. Applicable Law

5. The law applicable to each of the allegations is detailed below.

Allegation 1: that Procurement Officer 1 and the Finance Officer accepted bribes from Vendor
2

Provisional Criminal Code of Kosovo — Article 343 “Accepting Bribes”; Article 344 “Giving
Bribes”

Finance Administration Instruction No. 2/1999 (Revised 15 December 1999) — Public
Procurement Using Kosovo Consolidated Budget Funds — Section 4.3.2 —“Avoidance of
Conflicts of Interest and Corruption”

Allegation 2: that Procurement Officer 1 replaced a member of the Bid Evaluation Committee
Finance Administration Instruction No. 2/1999 (Revised 15 December 1999) — Public
Procurement Using Kosovo Consolidated Budget Funds — Section 4.1 “Full and Fair

Competition”; Section 23.9 “Examination and Evaluation of Tenders”

Allegation 3: that Procurement Officer 1 inappropriately included the Finance Officer in the Bid
Evaluation Committee

Page 2:
Finance Administration Instruction No. 2/1999 (Revised 15 December 1999) — Public
Procurement Using Kosovo Consolidated Budget Funds — Section 4.1 “Full and Fair
Competition”; Section 23.9 “Examination and Evaluation of Tenders”

Allegation 4: that Procurement Officer 1 favoured Vendor 2 in the tender process

Finance Administration Instruction No. 2/1999 (Revised 15 December 1999) — Public
Procurement Using Kosovo Consolidated Budget Funds — Section 4.1 “Full and Fair
Competition”

Allegation 5: that Vendor 1 Manager threatened Procurement Officer 1

Provisional Criminal Code of Kosovo — Article 161 “Threat”

lll. Investigation Details

Procurement Officer 1 managed the competitive tender for the supply of uniforms. In
addition to Vendor 1, Vendor 2 and Vendor 3 submitted bids following which Procurement
Officer 1 convened and chaired a Bid Opening Committee on 10-06-04. Present, in
addition to the committee that comprised members of the various airport work groups,
were representatives of the three bidding companies including Vendor 1 Manager.

Procurement Officer 1 also formed and chaired a Bid Evaluation Committee to assess the
offerings of the competitors, which comprised a range of uniforms and accessories for the
various categories of airport employees. On 18-06-04, the committee, though not satisfied
with all Vendor 2’s samples, tentatively decided in favour of that company, the median
bidder in terms of price (Vendor 1 was the highest bidder). The committee resolved that
Vendor 2 would be approached to determine the feasibility of no-cost design changes to
one of the uniforms for women employees. The committee reconvened on 23-06-04 at the
request of Pristina Airport Official. During the meeting, Pristina Airport Official announced
the cancellation of the tender. Pristina Airport Official later awarded a single-source
procurement contract for summer uniforms for newly hired staff, in the amount of
€106,059, to Vendor 1, which had supplied uniforms to the airport under two previous
contracts.

Allegation 1: that Procurement Officer 1 and the Finance Officer accepted bribes from Vendor

2

8.

10.

When asked by the ITF to substantiate his/her allegation that Procurement Officer 1 and
the Finance Officer had accepted bribes from Vendor 2, Vendor 1 Manager said that
he/she had heard the rumours in Pristina coffee bars but that he/she could not remember
from whom he/she had heard these rumours. He/she said that the witnesses to whom
he/she had referred in his letter of complaint were actually the same persons from whom
he/she heard the rumours. Vendor 1 Manager was unable to suggest which
representative of Vendor 2 had paid the bribes.

Vendor 2 Employee who attended the meeting of the Bid Opening Committee; Vendor 2
Manager; and Vendor 2 Director all told ITF that they had not paid bribes to Procurement
Officer 1 and/or the Finance Officer.

Procurement Officer 1 and the Finance Officer both denied accepting bribes or any other
consideration from any person in this matter.

Allegation 2: that Procurement Officer 1 replaced a member of the Bid Evaluation Committee

11.

Procurement Officer 1 explained to the ITF that the original nominee to the committee,
Committee member 1, had not been at work on the day that the committee first convened
and, therefore, had been replaced by Committee member 2, who then attended the
second session for continuity purposes. Committee member 1 and Committee member 2
confirmed Procurement Officer 1’s explanation for the replacement.

Page 3:
Allegation 3: that Procurement Officer 1 inappropriately included the Finance Officer in the Bid
Evaluation Committee

12.

The Finance Officer, Procurement Officer 1 and Pristina Airport Official told the ITF that
the Finance Officer participated on the Bid Evaluation Committee. However, Procurement
Officer 1 and Pristina Airport Official each said that the other had nominated the Finance
Officer to the committee. KTA legal staff advised the ITF that the wisdom of allowing a
representative of the Finance Department to participate in bid evaluations is questionable
because, generally, officers whose function involves payment should not evaluate
contractors to whom payment will become due. According to KTA legal staff, however,
such participation is not precluded by any rule or law. Section 23.9.2 of Finance
Administration Instruction No. 2/1999 (Revised 15 December 1999) — Public Procurement
Using Kosovo Consolidated Budget Funds precludes only an “approving officer” from the
Procuring Entity who will eventually sign a contract from serving as a tender evaluator.
The Finance Officer was not an “approving officer” in this procurement process and,
therefore, was not prevented from serving as an evaluator.

Allegation 4: that Procurement Officer 1 favoured Vendor 2 in the tender process

13.

14.

15.

16.

In addition to Procurement Officer 1 and the Finance Officer, Bid Evaluation Committee
members Committee member 3, Committee member 4, Committee member 5,
Committee member 6, Committee member 2, and Committee member 7 told the ITF that
the conduct of the committee was completely fair and proper. (Committee member 4 told
the ITF that he/she attended the first session of the Bid Evaluation Committee but that
he/she missed the second session because of the illness of his son.) The general
consensus of the committee was that Vendor 2’s samples were better overall in terms of
quality and design but the committee was not completely satisfied with Vendor 2’s goods.
However, Pristina Airport Official told the ITF that the committee was divided during the
second session, with one group preferring Vendor 2’s goods and the other preferring
those of Vendor 1. Pristina Airport Official said that Procurement Officer 1 (who, as
committee chair, did not have the right to vote) and the Finance Officer argued in favour
of Vendor 2. None of the committee members supported Pristina Airport Official’s
assertions in this regard.

The ITF allowed Pristina Airport Official to review a copy of the Bid Evaluation Committee
report prepared by Procurement Officer 1, the last page of which listed the attendees at
the session of the Bid Opening Committee (Procurement Officer 1 and the Finance
Officer were the only members of the Bid Opening Committee who also served on the Bid
Evaluation Committee). Upon looking at the attendee list of the Bid Opening Committee,
Pristina Airport Official named the committee members who, he/she said, had Vendor 1’s
and Vendor 2’s samples respectively. He/she correctly identified Procurement Officer 1
and the Finance Officer but the other four persons whom he/she named were members of
the Bid Opening Committee, not the Bid Evaluation Committee. Pristina Airport Official’s
mistaken identification of these persons as Bid Evaluation Committee members indicates
that his memory of the events of the second committee meeting might be unclear.

Pristina Airport Official told the ITF that he/she believed that had he/she not cancelled the
competitive tender, the Bid Evaluation Committee would have awarded the contract to
Vendor 2. Pristina Airport Official said that he/she believed that Procurement Officer 1
had been “primed” to award the contract to Vendor 2 because Procurement Officer 1 had
expressed a preference for and argued in support of Vendor 2’s” inferior product and
because a source (whose identity Pristina Airport Official was unable to recall) had told
him/her that Procurement Officer 1 had been driven to the airport on several occasions by
a person in either the Ministry of Finance or the Ministry of Transportation who was
associated with Vendor 2. Pristina Airport Official said that he/she cancelled the
competitive tender for these reasons. He/she said that he/she did not voice his suspicions
during the committee meeting, adding that he/she did not subsequently report his
suspicions because “priming” is common and if he/she reported every instance he/she
would not have time to do his job. He/she said that proving that Procurement Officer 1
had “pushed” one competitor would have been difficult.

Procurement Officer 1 told the ITF that a former Kosovo Minister is his godfather. He/she
said that he/she has never received a ride to the airport from the Former Kosovo Minister

3

Page 4:
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

or in his car. He/she said that he/she has no idea whether the Former Kosovo Minister is
in any way associated with Vendor 2. He/she said that neither the Former Kosovo
Minister nor any other person pressured him/her to show favouritism to Vendor 2.

Pristina Airport Official told the ITF that he/she had not seen Vendor 1 Manager’s letter of
complaint and had never heard of Vendor 1 Manager’s allegation regarding the bribery of
Procurement Officer 1 and the Finance Officer. However, Pristina Airport Official’s
administrative assistant said that he/she had been present when Vendor 1 Manager
voiced his suspicion to Pristina Airport Official that an individual from the airport had
accepted bribes. Pristina Airport Official’ administrative assistant said that he/she could
not recall to whom Vendor 1 Manager referred. In addition, he/she told the ITF that
Vendor 1 Manager had given him/her his letter of complaint. Pristina Airport Official’s
administrative assistant said that he/she does not recall whether he/she handed the letter
to Pristina Airport Official or left it for his attention and he/she does not recall Pristina
Airport Official mentioning the letter.

Pristina Airport Official told the ITF that, following the cancellation of the competitive
tender, his only alternative to obtain uniforms for newly hired staff was to award a contract
to Vendor 1, who had supplied the airport for the past two years. He/she said that had
he/she let a new tender for summer uniforms, the uniforms would not have been ready
until the end of August (2004).

ITF allowed Pristina Airport Official to read a copy of a memo dated 30-06-04 to him/her
from Procurement Officer 1 that described the events of the tender process and
summarized the reasons for its cancellation. Pristina Airport Official told the ITF that,
although he/she had signed the memo, he/she had not “really read” it previously. The
articulated reasons for the cancellation are listed below. Pristina Airport Official and
Procurement Officer 1 said that they had contributed to the list of reasons but disagreed
over which of the reasons had been provided by whom, however, they both said that
Pristina Airport Official had provided the term “unsatisfactory quality”.

i) unsatisfactory quality

ii) unsatisfactory design

iii) evaluation committee not satisfied with the uniforms
iv) no manufacturing details were given

v) documents not completed

Procurement Officer 2 told the ITF that he/she transmitted several documents regarding
the single-source procurement of summer uniforms to KTA. Included in the document
package was a Procurement Memo dated 07-07-04 signed by Pristina Airport Official and,
according to Procurement Officer 2, prepared by Pristina Airport Official. (Pristina Airport
Official told the ITF that he/she believes that he/she wrote the justification.) The
justification segment of the memo stated that uniforms would be obtained by single-
source procurement from the current supplier (Vendor 1) for reasons of good quality and
durability.

The ITF pointed out to Pristina Airport Official that he/she had referred to the same
uniforms as being of “unsatisfactory quality” and “good quality” in the respective
documents. He/she then admitted “flowering up” his memo and providing embellishment
to ensure that KTA would approve the procurement. He/she said that the term
“unsatisfactory quality” in the memo dated 30-06-04 was poorly chosen and that the
quality of Vendor 1’s uniforms actually met the airport’s requirements. However, he/she
said that the design of the uniforms design was “basic and poor.”

Allegation 5: that Vendor 1 Manager threatened Procurement Officer 1

22.

Procurement Officer 1 told the ITF that, on a day (he/she could not specify the date)
following the second meeting of the Bid Evaluation Committee at which the decision was
taken to cancel the competitive tender, Vendor 1 Manager entered Procurement Officer
1’s office and, in the presence of Procurement Officer 2 and a Pristina Airport Civil
Engineer made utterances that Procurement Officer 1 interpreted as a threat. According
to Procurement Officer 1, Vendor 1 Manager said that he/she would meet Procurement
Officer 1 outside; that, because he/she had cancelled the tender, Procurement Officer 1

4

Page 5:
would find out who Vendor 1 Manager was; and that Procurement Officer 1 would see
what he/she had done by canceling the tender.

23. Procurement Officer 2 assistant confirmed that he/she had been present during the
incident but he/she had paid only partial attention to what transpired. He/She said that
Vendor 1 Manager might have mentioned that Procurement Officer 1 would have to deal
with KTA Internal Audit and the Investigation Task Force. The Civil Engineer also
confirmed his presence and said that he/she could recall Vendor 1 Manager saying
something to the effect of “You have to see who | am.” The Civil Engineer said that
he/she interpreted the words to mean that Procurement Officer 1 should be afraid of
Vendor 1 Manager.

24. Vendor 1 Manager confirmed that an incident had occurred between him/her and
Procurement Officer 1. Vendor 1 Manager said that he/she told Procurement Officer 1
that he/she was the main reason for the cancellation of the tender and that he/she told
Procurement Officer 1 “You'll see what you have done. You'll see that I'll go to the highest
levels and if necessary, I'll see you in court.” Vendor 1 Manager said that he/she did not
ask Procurement Officer 1 to go outside with him/her, that he/she did not threaten
Procurement Officer 1 and did not imply that he/she would commit physical aggression.

IV. Findings of Fact

Allegation 1: that Procurement Officer 1 and the Finance Officer accepted bribes from Vendor
2

25. The ITF did not find any evidence to support the allegation that Procurement Officer 1
and/or the Finance Officer accepted bribes from Vendor 2 in this matter. Moreover, the
ITF did not find evidence that any person received a bribe or other compensation or a
promise of a bribe or other compensation in relation to either the competitive tender or the
single-source procurement. Therefore, the allegation of bribery is considered to be
unsubstantiated.

Allegation 2: that Procurement Officer 1 replaced a member of the Bid Evaluation Committee

26. The rationale for replacing the member of the Bid Evaluation Committee is reasonable.
Furthermore, Vendor 1 Manager did not intimate that the replacement was made for any
questionable purpose. Therefore, the allegation is considered to be correct but the
substantive act is not considered to have been based on ulterior motives.

Allegation 3: that Procurement Officer 1 inappropriately placed the Finance Officer on the Bid
Evaluation Committee

27. The ITF established that the Finance Officer participated on the committee but did not
determine whether he/she was nominated by Procurement Officer 1 or Pristina Airport
Official. Regardless, the ITF did not identify any indication that The Finance Officer’s
behaviour on the committee was in any way unprofessional or improper. In the absence
of specific regulations precluding the participation of finance personnel in such processes,
this allegation is considered to be unsubstantiated.

Allegation 4: that Procurement Officer 1 favoured Vendor 2 in the tender process

28. The ITF did not find any evidence to support the allegation that Procurement Officer 1 had
favoured Vendor 2 during the tender process. Similarly, Pristina Airport Official’s opinion
that Procurement Officer 1 had been “primed” to select Vendor 2 is unsubstantiated. The
credibility of Pristina Airport Official’s portrayal of Procurement Officer 1 as a strong
proponent of Vendor 2 in a divided committee was contradicted by the committee
members themselves and undermined by Pristina Airport Official’s misidentification of
most of the members. Procurement Officer 1’s management of the proceedings appears
to have been fair and objective based on the assertions of the members of the Bid
Evaluation Committee. Therefore, this allegation is considered to be unsubstantiated.

Allegation 5: that Vendor 1 Manager threatened Procurement Officer 1

5

Page 6:
29. The ITF was unable to substantiate that Vendor 1 Manager's utterances constituted a
threat against Procurement Officer 1.

V. Recommendations
30. The ITF offers the following recommendations:

Recommendation No. 1: It is recommended that UNMIK Pillar IV inform Procurement Officer 1
and the Finance Officer, as well as the KTA Internal Audit Unit, that the ITF did not find any
wrongdoing on the part of Procurement Officer 1 or the Finance Officer. (IV04/462/01)

Recommendation No. 2: It is recommended that UNMIK provide this report to both the
Department of Justice and the Financial Investigation Unit for information purposes, so as to
assist current investigations related to the alleged payment of “kickbacks” in exchange for
employment at Pristina Airport. (IV04/462/02)
