
Page 1:
UNITED NATIONS Un \y NATIONS UNIES

United Nations Interim @) Mission d’Administration
Administration Mission RS A Intérimaire des Nations
in Kosovo Unies au Kosovo
UNMIK

Investigation Task Force

DATE: 14 January 2005

REFERENCE: _ |TF/04/06

To: Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen
A: SRSG, UNMIK
From: Wolfgang Nikolaus
De: Team Leader, Investigation Task Force, UNMIK
Subject: Alleged Fraud — Pristina Airport Cargo Department (ITF Case Ne 0261/04)
Object:
Allegation
1. In July 2004, the Investigation Task Force (ITF) was provided with a copy of a letter dated 28
May 2004, from the Cargo Manager of an Airline to a Staff Member of Public Enterprise
Airport Pristina. In the letter, the Cargo Manager referred to several problems relative to an
Invoice for April 2004 issued by the Cargo Department of Pristina Airport for the handling of
the outgoing mail of a Member State’s KFOR. At the time, Pristina Airport staff could not
locate a record of this invoice in the airport's financial records, and, therefore, the commission
of fraud on the part of staff in the Cargo Department was suspected.
Background

2. Pristina Airport is the Airline’s cargo handling agent for both imports and exports and the

Airline is the Member State’s KFOR’s mail handling agent. Pristina Airport collects mail-
handling revenues on behalf of the Airline and deposits these revenues to the airline’s bank
account after deducting the appropriate commission.

The issues identified in the letter by the Airline Cargo Manager related to the high rate
(€0.50/kg) charged by Pristina Airport for handling outgoing mail; the fact that the Invoice had
been incorrectly sent to the Member State’s KFOR instead of their agent, the Airline; and the
inappropriate addition of Value Added Tax (VAT), which is not applicable to international
traffic.

Investigative Details

4. Subsequent to the receipt of the complaint, ITF learned from the Airline Cargo Dept. that

Pristina Airport had retroactively reduced its handling charges for outgoing mail to €0.12/kg
and was no longer charging VAT. Pristina Airport staff confirmed this information and advised
that the Invoice had been corrected and re-issued to the Airline. Furthermore, Pristina Airport
staff advised that correct records of all financial transactions between Pristina Airport and the
Airline relating to the invoices for April and subsequent months had been located. These
assertions were confirmed in copies of corrected invoices and excerpts of the electronic
financial records of Pristina Airport that were provided to ITF.

ITF made the general observation that Pristina Airport's mail handling invoices indicate that
the entire invoiced amount is a “tax payment”. This terminology, according to Pristina Airport
staff, is incorrect as these amounts are handling fees that conform to established tariff rates.

Page 2:
Conclusion and Recommendation

6. ITF was not able to establish an explanation for the difficulty in locating a record of the
transaction relating to the referred Invoice . The entry may have been overlooked or merely
delayed because of the misdirection of the April 2004 invoice. The ancillary issues of the
disputed mail handling rate and the application of VAT were resolved by mutual agreement.

7. ITF, by this memorandum, advises you that evidence of fraud, loss or wrongdoing was not
identified in this matter and, therefore, that no further action is required.

8. ITF recommends that steps be taken to replace the potentially misleading words “tax
payment’ with appropriate terminology on Pristina Airport’s mail handling invoices.

9. Any questions or comments regarding the information provided in this report should be made
to Mr. Wolfgang Nikolaus, ITF Kosovo, at +381 38 504 604 3896 or Mr. Mark Gough, ID/OIOS
Vienna, at +44 1 26060 5406.

cc: Mr. James Wasserstrom, OPOE
Mr. Paul-Lachal Roberts, OLAF
Mr. Mark Gough, ID/OIOS
