
Page 1:
UNITED NATIONS NATIONS UNIES

This report is protected under the provisions of
ST/SGB/273, paragraph 18, of 7 September 1994"

STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL

OFFICE OF INTERNAL OVERSIGHT SERVICES
INVESTIGATIONS DIVISION

REDACTED
REPORT OF INVESTIGATION

ID CASE NO. 0570/03

16 December 2004


Page 2:
REPORT INTO SEEKING ASSISTANCE FROM PERSONS EXTERNAL TO THE ORGANIZATION

ID CASE No. 0570/03
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page No.
I. INTRODUCTION (oieeesssssesessssssssesscsssssescsssssneeseesnneees 3
II. APPLICABLE LAW oiscesecssssssesscssssseecssssseeesssssneeeeees 3
III. MerTHODOLOGY 3
Iv. BACKGROUND INFORMATION oo on..ccccscssesessesesesteseeeeees 3
Vv. INVESTIGATIVE DETAILS occccccccsscesssseceseeseseesesees 4
A. “Hiwot Abebe” email of 26 January 2003 ... 4
B. Email submitted by the staff member to Ambassador

Negroponte and US Government Officials wee 4

C. Interview of the staff member... eee
D. Emails by the staff member to Mr. Mzumara, OIC, SRO,

LUSAKA eee eee cece eee ce eee ee ee ee eens este eases eeeeeeeeeenees 5
E. Interview with Mr. Dickson Mzumara
F. Allegations of Sexual Harassment .......... 6
VI. EVIDENCE, FINDING OF FACTS eoscccsssssssssessssseees 8
VII. CONCLUSION oivcceecssssssesscsssssesecsessssseesersssnesecssssseesssssnnesesess 8

VIII. RECOMMENDATIONS


Page 3:
I. INTRODUCTION

1. The Investigations Division of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS) received several emails sent to
persons external to the Organization, which alleged that
wrongdoings were committed at the Economic Commission for Africa
(ECA) but no action was taken. One of the authors of the said
emails was a staff member of ECA.

: Subsequently, an investigation was conducted that revealed
hat contrary to UN Rules and Regulations, the staff member sent
mails to His Excellency, Ambassador John Negroponte of the US
ission to the UN, the President and Vice-President of the
nited States of America, Senator John Kerry and Senator Dodd of
he United States Senate amongst others.

® tn

tas

II. APPLICABLE LAW

3. Regulation 1.2 (i) of the Staff Regulations provides that
“Staff members shall exercise the utmost discretion with regard
to all matters of official business. They shall not communicate
to any Government, entity, person or any other source any
information known to them by reason of their official position
that they know or ought to have known has not been made public,
except as appropriate in the normal course of their duties or by
authorization of the Secretary-General. These obligations do
not cease upon separation from service”.

IIl. METHODOLOGY
4. OIOS investigation of this matter entailed obtaining and
analyzing relevant documents. Staff members were also
interviewed including the staff member.
Iv. BACKGROUND INFORMATION
5. The staff member worked in ECA at the P5 level. He retired

at the end of November 2003 having worked for the Organization
for over 25 years.

Page 4:
Vv. INVESTIGATIVE DETAILS
A. “Hiwot Abebe” email of 26 January 2003

6. During the course of the investigation, it was revealed
that on 26 January 2003, an anonymous person, using the
identities of “Hiwot Abebe” sent an email to the President and
Vice-President of the United States of America. The email was
also addressed to Senator John Kerry and Senator Dodd of the
United States Senate. The email had an attachment that was
addressed to the Executive Secretary of ECA and highlighted
allegations of sexual harassment and rape perpetrated by some

senior officials of ECA within the ECA Complex. The title to
the attachment was “Crimes of Rape and Maladministration within
the compound of ECA”. The document was also copied to the

Secretary-General, Ethiopian Foreign Ministry and senior
officials in the UN System.

7. “Abebe’s” complaint to the American Government was that the
Executive Secretary, ECA had failed to take action against staff
members who were alleged to have sexually harassed and raped ten
women staff members of ECA. “Abebe” was therefore asking the
American Government to intervene on behalf of the aggrieved
women.

8. The above email and the attachment were copied to the staff
member and other persons working in the Organization.

B. Email submitted by the staff member to
Ambassador Negroponte
and US Government Officials

9. On 28 January 2003, the staff member wrote an email to His
Excellency, Ambassador John Negroponte of the US Mission to the
UN and “Hiwot”. He also copied the email to the President and
Vice - President of the United States of America, Senator John
Kerry and Senator Dodd of the United States Senate. In
addition, he attached to the email the document alleging rape
and sexual harassment by some officials of ECA - “Crimes of Rape
and Maladministration within the compound of ECA”. On the same
day White House responded and thanked the staff member for
emailing President Bush and Vice - President Cheney.

10. In his email to Ambassador Negroponte, the staff member
informed him that the aggrieved staff members had exhausted all
avenues available for recourse under the UN justice system. The
staff member therefore appealed to Ambassador Negroponte to

Page 5:
intervene by drawing this to the attention of the Secretary-
General.

Cc. Interview of the staff member

11. In his interview with the Investigators, the staff member
initially denied sending the email and the attachment in
question to Ambassador Negroponte and other persons outside the
UN System. Later he conceded that he wrote to the Ambassador in
his capacity as a staff representative after the aggrieved staff
members approached him for assistance.

12. The staff member stated that there were ten women staff
members who were victims of sexual harassment at ECA. When the
Investigators requested the staff member to provide the names of
the ten women staff members, he refused to do so. He stated that
he was actually told about the allegations by a Staff Union
member who confided to him that the allegations were true. The
staff member refused to disclose the name of the staff member to
the Investigators.

13. When the staff member was asked why he sought assistance
from Ambassador Negroponte, a non-UN staff member, his response
was that the aggrieved staff members who were working as a group
felt that the issue was taking a long time to resolve;
therefore, he decided to appeal to Ambassador Negroponte. He
said that he did not consult ECA management before writing to
persons outside the Organization as the ECA internal justice
system seemed to have collapsed. He said that his conscience
was clear that sexual harassment did happen and that was why he
had intervened on behalf of the female staff members.

14. The staff member stated that the sexual harassment issue
was raised and addressed at several staff and management
meetings by the Executive Secretary. In this connection, on 18
March 2003, the Executive Secretary wrote a memorandum to the
Officer-in-Charge, OHRM responding to all the allegations
leveled against the management of ECA. On the allegation of
sexual harassment, the Executive Secretary concluded by stating
that it was “totally unfounded and simply ridiculous and
preposterous”.

D. Emails by the staff member to Mr. Mzumara, OIC, SRO, Lusaka

15. On 29 January 2003, the staff member wrote an email to Mr.
Dickson Mzumara, Officer-in-Charge of the ECA Sub Regional
Office in Lusaka, Zambia confirming that he had written to
Ambassador Negroponte because he had had a chat with friends who

5

Page 6:
thought that “this was too much of a hot potato”. Mr. Mzumara
was also a recipient of a copy of the email that was addressed
to Ambassador Negroponte by the staff member.

16. On the same day, Mr. Mzumara replied through an email to
the staff member and concurred with his action of writing to the
Ambassador. However, Mr. Mzumara pointed out to the staff
member that he was concerned that he, the staff member, was
writing to persons outside the Organization. Mr. Mzumara stated
that “Yes I thought as much. My concern was you were going out
of the system and this is not in line with the Conditions of
Service. See what comes out of it”. The staff member responded
via email dated 29 January 2003 and stated that, “Thanks that I
have been told. This question was brought in the JAB in
Nairobi. With a few phone calls, the case was shelved. The
lady who broadcasted the message is the one who wrote to White
House and the Vice Presidents of the USA. If the internal
justice system had functioned every thing would have been kept
within the system. My hope was Negroponte being in the UN
Secretariat would do damage control and get somehow the Boss to
address the problem, in the best interest of the Secretary

General. The ladies will continue writing to Human Rights
Organizations, especially those that are fired. It may not
produce immediate results but a lot of damage will be done”. He

added that he wrote to the Ambassador “to show the man that
dialogue is the best option in life”.

E. Interview with Mr. Dickson Mzumara

17. Mr. Mzumara recalled that in January 2003, the concerned
staff member who retired in November 2003 wrote to US Ambassador
Negroponte concerning grievances of sexual harassment at ECA.
He said that after he received a copy of that communication
through email, he wrote to the staff member and advised him that
it was contrary to UN Regulations for him to communicate with
persons external to the Organization. In connection with this
communication, Mr. Mzumara advised the staff member to tender a
letter of resignation.

F. Allegations of Sexual Harrassment

18. The allegation of sexual harassment made by one of the
female staff members named in the anonymous letters was
investigated by OIOS/ID. She had complained that her contract
was terminated after she had turned down the sexual advances of
a manager.

Page 7:
19. The female staff member informed OIOS that during an office
retreat held at the Nazareth Restaurant in 2001, the manager was
at the coffee shop with two other staff members, Mr. Oluwatete
Olokodana, Deputy Chief of Security and Mr. Vintzislav Stokykov,
Chief, Facilities Management Section, when the manager
approached her saying, “why are you wearing this, it’s too hot
here”. Whilst saying this he put his hand on her T-shirt and
tried to look and touch her breast.

20. When interviewed, Mr. Olokodana said that he did not
witness any sexual harassment at the retreat. However, in the
presence of Mr. Stoykov, he recalled that the female staff
member complained to the manager that she was not feeling well
whilst they were having lunch.

21. OIO0S interviewed Mr. Stoykov who said that such an incident
did not occur. However, he recalled the female staff member
being in the company of the manager, Mr. Olokodana and himself
when she came to complain that she had flu whilst they were
having coffee.

22. The manager told OIOS that he did not sexually harass the
female staff member and that such allegations are made when
staff members are dissatisfied with certain managerial
decisions. He said that the female staff member’s contract was
terminated because her performance was poor.

23. When the female staff member was re-interviewed by ID/OIOS,
she maintained that she had been sexually harassed. When asked
why she had not engaged the various possible internal systems,
including OHRMS to have the issue resolved, she stated that she
had not pursued the issue because she did not know how to
approach it. The female staff member explained that she thinks
that her contract was not renewed because of the sexual
harassment. The female staff member left the employment of ECA
some two years ago and has never taken any steps to engage any
United Nations system options to pursue her complaint.

24. In light of the above, there is therefore insufficient
evidence to support the female staff member’s allegation of
sexual harassment. Both Mr. Olokodana and Mr. Stoykov whom she
claimed witnessed the incident deny that any incident occurred
and reported a substantially different exchange.

25. Ms. Bongoy - Mawalla, Chief General Services Section
explained to OIOS that she was the focal point for women until
July 2003. She said that during her tenure, she issued a

Page 8:
circular to create awareness about sexual harassment but no
incident was reported by staff members.

26. During interviews with OI0S, Mr. Ali Todaro, Special
Assistant to the Executive Secretary also denied sexually
harassing women staff members at ECA as alleged in the anonymous
emails. Because those women were not named and the staff member
refused to identify them to ID/OIOS, it was not possible to
further pursue the allegations.

VI. EVIDENCE, FINDINGS OF FACT

27. As indicated above, Staff Regulation 1.2 (i) stipulates
that staff members shall not communicate to any Government,
entity, person or any other source any official information that
they know has not been made public except as appropriate in the
normal course of their duties or by authorization by the
Secretary General. These obligations do not cease upon
separation from service.

28. Email messages sent to US Ambassador Negroponte, President
Bush, Vice President Cheney, Senators and other persons external
to the Organization by The staff member is a contravention of
the above Staff Regulation. The reason for so doing -
especially in light of his refusal to identify the sources of
the complaints he was ostensibly raising to the OIOS

Investigators when asked — appears evident in The staff member’s
reply to Mr. Mzumara who told him his actions contravened Staff
Regulations. The staff member had at the time indicated that,
“Wo se--- if the internal justice system had functioned every
thing would have been kept within the system. My hope was

Negroponte being in the UN Secretariat would do damage control
and get somehow the Boss to address the problem, in the best
interest of the Secretary General. The ladies will continue
writing to Human Rights Organizations, especially those that are
fired. It may not produce immediate results but a lot of damage
will be done”.

29. During interviews with the OIOS Investigators, by his own
admission, the staff member confirmed communicating to persons
outside the Organization. He did not inform ECA management
arguing that the ECA internal justice system had collapsed.
However, he knew that the matter was being dealt with by the
Executive Secretary as confirmed by him during his interview
with the Investigators.

Page 9:
vit. CONCLUSION

30. In light of the above findings, it is evident that the

staff member contravened Staff Regulation 1.2 (i). He sought
intervention from US Ambassador Negroponte and other persons who
were external to the Organization. Further, the staff member

disseminated emails that he knew were not to be made public
without authorization from the Secretary-General.

VIII. RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation 1

It is recommended that this investigation report be placed in
the staff member’s Personnel Status File; (ID Rec. No.
IV03/570/01)

Recommendation 2

It is recommended that Office of Legal Affairs (OLA) send to the
staff member a cease and desist letter pointing out that though
separated from the Organization he has an obligation not to
disseminate official UN information as provided for in
Regulation 1.2(i) of the Staff Regulations “Staff members shall
exercise the utmost discretion with regard to all matters of
official business. They shall not communicate to any
Government, entity, person or any other source any information
known to them by reason of their official position that they
know or ought to have known has not been made public, except as
appropriate in the normal course of their duties or by
authorization of the Secretary-General. These obligations do
not cease upon separation from service”.

D Rec. No. IV03/570/02)

