
Page 1:
UNITED NATIONS Uf ) NATIONS UNIES
United Nations Interim \( ly Mission d’Administration
Administration Mission S\S-2/4 Intérimaire des Nations Unies

in Kosovo “UNMIK - au Kosovo

UNMIK

Investigation Task Force

Date: December 3", 2004

Reference: ITF/kh/ 04/03

To: Mr. Seren Jessen-Petersen

A: SRSG, UNMIK

From: Wolfgang Nikolaus

De: Team Leader, Investigation Task Force, UNMIK

Subject: Alleged misappropriation of funds — Manager
Object: (Case No. 050/04)

1. The Investigation Task Force (ITF) has been investigating an allegation regarding
administrative irregularities regarding the insurance coverage for Pristina Airport
by a London-based Company, who then purchased the cover from Insurance
Company | between 2001 and 2003.

2. Based on extensive documentation obtained from UNMIK Pillar II, the Kosovo
Trust Agency (KTA) and Public Enterprise Airport Pristina (PEAP), the ITF
determined that the responsible Manager did not undertake efforts in 2002 or
2003 to invite international tenders for the Airport’s insurance coverage.
According to UNMIK regulations 1999/2 — Finance Administration Instruction on
Public Procurement using Kosovo Consolidated Funds — and in view of the cost
of the premiums of more than $125,000 USD, such a tender should have been
undertaken. The Manager did not prepare an international tender for at least the
period 2 October 2003 to 1 October 2004, instead, he concluded a contract in
favour of Insurance Company | effecting insurance coverage pertaining to
Pristina International Airport for a further year. It should be considered as to
whether this conduct demonstrates probable cause with regard to the waste or
misappropriation of public funds. Such an issue should be determined by a review
of the matter by the Department of Justice.

3. The ITF investigation also adduced evidence of double insurance coverage at
Pristina International Airport. On 1 April 2004, an Icelandic Civil Aviation
Administration (ICAA) assumed the responsibility to ensure air safety at Pristina

Page | of 2

Page 2:
Copy to:

International Airport and established new insurance coverage package for aviation
liability guaranteed by Insurance Company 2. That task was undertaken at the
request of UNMIK.

The Manager had direct contact with the above-mentioned Insurance Ccompany 2
for the preparation of the new coverage. Despite the fact that the Airport
insurance coverage by London-based Company/Insurance Company | was valid
until 2 October 2004, the insurance coverage arranged by UNMIK and the
Insurance Company 2 commenced on | April 2004 and included the same
insurance substance, but with even higher sums insured and several small
amendments.

The contract with Insurance Company | covered the period 2 October 2003 to 1
October 2004. According to the Insurance Company | Contract Policy dated 9
July 2002, paragraph 4 of the General Conditions, the “...Policy may be cancelled
at any time at the written request of the Insured ... provided 30 days notice ...”.
The Manager would appear to have ignored that fact. The airport therefore had
two insurance packages for the period 1 April to 1 October 2004. The financial
loss for Pristina International Airport arises from this duplicate insurance
coverage.

ITF investigators have conducted three administrative interviews, including of the
suspect. As a result of these interviews, the ITF believes there is a prima facie
case against the Manager for offence(s) against the Provisional Criminal
Procedure Code of Kosovo.

The ITF, by this memorandum, advises you of our preliminary findings and seeks
your approval for the matter to be forwarded to the Department of Justice for
appropriate judicial review. The ITF file will be made available to the Department
of Justice for the purposes of that review and any future judicial investigation.

Any questions or comments on the above information should be addressed to Mr
Wolfgang Nikolaus, Head, ITF (ext. 3896) in Pristina, or Mr Mark Gough,
ID/OIOS Vienna on +43 | 26060 5406.

Mr. James Wasserstrom, OPOE
Mr. Paul-Lachal Roberts, OLAF
Mr. Mark Gough, ID/OIOS

Page 2 of 2
