
Page 1:
UNITED NATIONS
NATIONS UNIES

This report is protected under the provisions of
ST/SGB/273, paragraph 18, of 7 September 1994"

STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL

OFFICE OF INTERNAL OVERSIGHT SERVICES
INVESTIGATIONS DIVISION

REDACTED
REPORT OF INVESTIGATION

ID CASE NO. 0050/05

4 March 2005


Page 2:
Report of Investigation — ID Case 0050/05

I. INTRODUCTION

1. On 13 February 2005, the Investigations Division of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (ID/OIOS) received a request from UNON Official 1 to inquire
into allegations that locally recruited United Nations Office at Nairobi (UNON) staff
may have engaged in improper conduct by submitting fraudulent letters of
appointments showing longer contract duration dates to obtain loans from the United
Nations Co-operative Savings and Credit Society Limited (UN-SACCO), which
operates within UNON premises.

2. The request was prompted by an earlier report submitted to UNON
Management by UNON Official 2, on a scheme whereby locally recruited staff
members from the Nairobi-based United Nations Children’s Fund/Somalia Support
Centre (UNICEF/Somalia) obtained UN-SACCO loans by submitting fraudulent
letters of appointments to UN-SACCO. The primary concern of UNON Management
was that a similar fraudulent scheme might have spread to UNON and other Nairobi-
based United Nations Agencies.

3. At the time of the request, two ID/OIOS Investigators were on mission to
Nairobi on another matter, but given the concerns expressed by UNON Managers, the
ID/OIOS Investigators were directed by ID/OIOS Management to look into this
matter with celerity, and did so, from 14 through 18 February 2005.

4. The purpose of this report is to present the findings of the preliminary
ID/OIOS Investigation together with recommendations for appropriate action by
UNON Management.

II. BACKGROUND INFORMATION
A. UN-SACCO

5. According to information provided in a leaflet, (Attachment 1), UN-SACCO
was created in 1975, “to establish a forum for United Nations staff in Kenya to save
their disposable income and borrow at minimal cost to meet their socio-economic
needs.” At present, UN-SACCO has a capital of US $ 13.5 million with about 2,500
members, and is managed by a Management Committee elected at an annual General
Meeting of the Society on a renewable three-year term.

6. In order to become a UN-SACCO member, a staff member of the United
Nations completes an “Application for Membership” form (Attachment 2) and pays a
fee of Kshs. 500 (about US $ 7). UN-SACCO members own shares and can request
and obtain individual loans after holding membership in UN-SACCO for six months.
Members may apply for a loan up to three times the value of their shares. The length
of the loans cannot extend beyond the term of employment by the United Nations.

Page 3:
7. To obtain an individual loan, a staff member is required to complete either a
“Loan Application & Loan Agreement Form” (Attachment 3) or an “Instant Loan
Facility Application & Agreement Form” (Attachment 4). The staff member must
attach to his/her request documents including copies of his/her latest payslip, National
Identification Card or Passport and a copy of his/her letter of contract.

8. A copy of the letter of contract is required to ensure that the applicant holds a
valid contract, which covers the agreed period of time for the repayment of the loan.
The benefit of a longer contract is that it permits repayment in lesser amounts over a
longer period of time.

9. To ensure guarantee of repayment, the applicant must provide up to six
guarantors in the event of the borrower’s default. The guarantors must also be UN-
SACCO members.

10. The applications for loans are reviewed by UN-SACCO staff and a Credit
Committee, which approve, defer, or reject the application.

B. UNICEF/Somalia Fraud

11. On 10 February 2005, while settling the separation payment of a former
locally recruited UNICEF/Somalia staff member, an Administrative Officer who
worked on the matter noted that the staff member had borrowed a large amount of
money from UN-SACCO in January 2004 and that at the time of his/her separation
s/he still owed UN-SACCO about one-third of the amount borrowed.

12. The Administrative Officer learned from UN-SACCO management that the
loan was granted based upon a letter of appointment submitted to UN-SACCO by that
staff member, which showed that his/her contract would be renewed through 31
December 2006. However, the contract was actually only from | January 2004 to 31
December 2004.

13. The Administrative Officer requested a copy of the appointment letter and
found that it was fraudulent, in that the date of the expiration of the contract was false
and the signature of a UNICEF Operations Officer named in the letter was forged.
Upon further inquiries from UN-SACCO managers, UNICEF/Somalia Management
started an inquiry and found that other UNICEF/Somalia staff members had obtained
similarly improper loans. UNICEF/Somalia has only approximately 20 staff members.

14. The results of this inquiry were described in a “Report on the preliminary
investigation of a case of fraudulent signatures and use of office stationary and
official seal - UNICEF Somalia, Nairobi”, dated 11 February 2005, which included
copies of the false letters of appointment and written statements of several locally
recruited UNICEF staff who admitted their improper conduct. (Attachment 5)

I. INVESTIGATIVE DETAILS

Cc. Interviews with UNICEF staff

Page 4:
15. Upon request from ID/OIOS, UNICEF Management agreed to cooperate with
the ID/OIOS inquiry by providing access to its files and staff members involved in the
fraud. However, UNICEF Management insisted, and ID/OIOS agreed, that ID/OIOS
interviews of their staff be conducted at UNICEF premises and in the presence of two
Senior UNICEF Managers. The objectives of these interviews by ID/OIOS were to
confirm and/or rule out involvement by UNON staff members in similar cases and to
obtain information to ensure that UNON management safeguard mechanisms to avoid
similar occurrences at UNON.

16. ID/OIOS could not interview all UNICEF staff or former staff involved in the
fraud. For example, one staff member passed away and another, who had left
UNICEF, declined the interview. In addition, the UNICEF inquiry was not final and
information obtained primarily through the interviews of UNICEF staff by ID/OIOS
suggested that there might be more UNICEF staff involved than initially envisaged.

17. During their interviews with ID/OIOS, the concerned UNICEF staff confirmed
that they misused UNICEF letterhead and official seal, indicated that they forged the
signature of a UNICEF Operations officer and that they provided UN-SACCO with
incorrect information about the duration of their contracts in order to obtain loans. All
of them mentioned the ease with which they accessed official UNICEF stamps,
stationeries and computers, although given the limited responsibilities of some of
them, for example, the drivers, such access should not have occurred.

18. Further, most interviewees stated that they acted alone and, with one
exception, all denied that either their UNICEF or UNON colleagues assisted them in
their fraudulent activities or had been otherwise aware of or involved in such
improper actions.

D. Interviews with UN-SACCO and UNON staff

19. | UN-SACCO and UNON staff members interviewed by the ID/OIOS
Investigators provided general information about their operations and otherwise
cooperated with the ID/OIOS inquiry by providing unhindered access to their files.
However, these interviews did not produce conclusive information to either suggest or
completely rule out improper conduct on the part of UNON staff members.

E. Additional Investigative steps

20. Documentation obtained from UN-SACCO shows that about 2,500 staff
members from UNON and other United Nations related organizations have requested
and obtained UN-SACCO loans, about one thousand of whom are UNON staff. Given
the large number of records to review, which would then need to be compared to
similar records from UNON, and the absence of any identified subjects, the ID/OIOS
Investigators decided to do a thorough review of a sampling of cases. Files were
selected for review where the loan amount was high, the duration of the contract long,
or the applicant was also a guarantor on other loans.

21. Further, whenever the ID/OIOS Investigators noted apparent irregularities
concerning letters of appointments or other similar documents produced by these staff
to UN-SACCO, for example letters suggesting that their contracts would be renewed

Page 5:
beyond the expiration date of their contracts, the ID/OIOS officers made copies of
those documents and compared them with the corresponding documentation available
in the Official Status Files of those staff and/or confirmed with UNON officials
whose signatures appeared on those letters that they had indeed signed them.

22. The ID/OIOS Investigators noted with concern that in January 2005, one
Senior UNEP Manager had informed UN-SACCO management that the contract of a
particular staff member is likely to be extended for a further two years, subject to
satisfactory performance. During the manager’s interview with ID/OIOS, s/he
admitted s/he had written a letter at the request of the staff member and advised that
such letters are sometimes provided to UN-SACCO so that locally recruited staff can
obtain loans. ID/OIOS cautions managers that the issuance of these letters may give
the impression that a staff member’s contract will be renewed.

23. In this regard, it should be noted that most, if not all letters of appointments
issued by the Organization, provide that fixed-term appointments do not carry any
expectation of renewal or of conversion to any other type of appointment and expire
automatically and without prior notice on the expiration date specified in the letter of
appointment.

24. This position is consistent with the jurisprudence of the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal (UNAT), which has established that good performance by a
staff member does not by itself create any legitimate expectation for renewal of any
fixed-term contract (see Judgement 562 dated 2 July 1993).

IV. FINDINGS

25. Given the absence of concrete information concerning improper conduct by
UNON staff, and based upon the review of a limited number of UN-SACCO and
UNON files, ID/OIOS finds that, while there is evidence of improper conduct on the
part of some UNICEF staff members in obtaining loans from UN-SACCO, there is no
evidence that such similar improper conduct also occurred at UNON.

26. In fact, as noted above, rather than producing information about possible
involvement of UNON staff in a similar fraud, the interviews of UNICEF/Somalia
staff yielded more information about further possible UNICEF subjects involved in
the same type of fraud, who had either not been identified in the UNICEF preliminary
inquiry or had not been interviewed. Moreover, these interviews also suggested
possible improper conduct by one UNICEF manager, who may have contributed to
the fraud by providing a letter, which suggested that the contract of one staff would be
extended further beyond its normal term.

Page 6:
27. The review of likely candidates for such frauds (i.e., those with large loans and
long contracts) did not produce a single instance of fraud. However, ID/OIOS cannot
exclude the possibility that locally recruited UNON staff members have submitted
fraudulent letters to UN-SACCO to obtain loans, as had their UNICEF colleagues.
Without concrete leads or a thorough review of all of the numerous files of the UNON
staff members who have obtained UN-SACCO loans, it is not possible to rule out
similar fraudulent schemes undertaken by UNON staff.

28.  ID/OIOS noted with concern the ease with which locally recruited UNICEF
staff, such as drivers, obtained access to official UNICEF stamps, stationeries and
computers. UNON should ensure that there are adequate controls in place to prevent
such abuses in UNON.

29. Further, while analysing the fraudulent scheme at UNICEF/Somalia, ID/OIOS
noted that when requests for letters of appointment suggesting contract renewal were
denied, staff members produced fraudulent letters of appointment which were
accepted by UN-SACCO management, although they were clearly different in style
and format from legitimate letters.

30. Furthermore, as noted above, in one case detected by ID/OIOS a letter of
appointment, which stated that renewal for two years was subject to satisfactory
performance, was provided to a UNON staff member. Such a letter, even from one
with the authority to do so, is improper, may be used to demonstrate a staff member’s
“right” to a renewal, and should stop immediately.

V. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

31. In light of the foregoing, ID/OIOS offers the following recommendations,
which could reduce the risk of the occurrences of similar fraudulent activities as the
one described in this report:

Recommendation 1: It is recommended that UNON Management inform UN-
SACCO Management that henceforth they should require original official UNON
documentation from UNON staff members, and any suspicions about the veracity of
such documentation should be promptly reported to UNON and the authenticity of
those documents verified. (ID Rec. No. IV05/050/01)

Recommendation 2: It is recommended that UNON ascertain if its personnel officers
are aware of instances of staff members requesting letters or documentation averring
that their contracts would be renewed beyond their expiration dates, and such requests
were denied. If so, UNON Management should liaise with UN-SACCO Management
to determine whether such staff members then submitted fraudulent documentation to
obtain loans. (ID Rec. No. TV05/050/02)

Recommendation 3: It is recommended that UNON Management ensure that its
official UNON seals/stamps are placed in secured places and are used solely by
authorized UNON officials to prevent the risk of their misuse by other persons. (ID
Rec. 1V05/050/03)

Page 7:
Recommendation 4: It is recommended that UNON Management requests UN-
SACCO Management to systematically confirm with UNON Personnel offices any
information related to employment duration provided to them by UNON staff
members. (ID Rec. IV05/050/04)
