
Page 1:
NSA Global SIGINT Highlights

Spying on French Ambassador who contemplated
exposing U.S. misuse of UN Oil-for-food program in Iraq

Keywords:

Restraint:
Title:

Date:
Organization:
Author:

Link:

Pages:

WikiLeaks release: June 29, 2015

National Security Agency, NSA, Top Secret, SIGINT, intelligence,
intercept, espionage, United States, USA, France, Jean-David Levitte,
Iraq, UN, Oil For Food, OFF, Saddam Hussein

TOP SECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, AUS,CAN, GBR and NZL

NSA Global SIGINT Highlights: French Envoy Plans to Release List of
U.S. Firms Who Allegedly Profited from OFF

2004

National Security Agency (NSA)
Summary Services Office
https://wikileaks.org/nsa-france/
1

Description

Interception of French Ambassador in Washington Jean-David Levitte reveals his frustration towards a
report from Iraq Survey Group and its finding that the UN Oil-for-food program was possibly misused by
French companies. In the interception Levitte states that it is scandalous that no U.S. companies are
named in the report and claimed that many French companies named were actually subsidiaries of U.S.
firms. He planned to present the list of these companies to both the U.S. Congress and the media.

Page 2:
(TS//SI) French Envoy Plans to Release List of U.S. Firms Who
Allegedly Profited From OFF

(TS//SI//REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR and NZL) French Ambassador Jean-
David Levitte in Washington plans to respond as early as today to
information in the Iraq Survey Group report regarding possible misuse
of the UN Oil-for-Food (OFF) program by companies from France and
other countries during the former Iraqi regime. The ambassador termed
the report scandalous, since it named no U.S. companies and he
claimed that many French companies with contracts under the OFF
program were actually subsidiaries of U.S. firms that also profited
from the business dealings. He therefore planned, with foreign
ministry backing, to present a list of these U.S. companies to both
the U.S. Congress and the media.

Unconventional
French diplomatic

3/00/27079-04 , 0719482
